Okay, we created our first commit.
If we then take a look at the list
of all our commits with Git log,
we see that for this one commit which we have thus far,
we also got this head arrow main annotation.
What's that about?
Well, main is the name of the branch to which this commit
belongs or of which this commit is part.
And I'll get back to branches a little bit later
in this section.
This head thing here though is something different
because this is basically a pointer managed by Git
that controls which commit is currently visible
in our project, so to say.
So which state is currently loaded, you could say.
Head points at the commit that's currently loaded.
And that's important because once you have more
than one commit, you can also start moving
between those commits.
You can move between those commits
with the Git checkout command
which needs the ID of the commit you wanna move to.
And that command would then allow you
to temporarily move to another commit.
Which means the other commits that come after the commit
you are moving to won't be deleted,
you just temporarily load another state.
And this head pointer simply tells Git which state
is currently loaded, which snapshot is loaded.
And when using Git checkout and for example
loading the commit C4 on this slide,
Git would move this pointer to that commit
and would load the contents of all the files
that were part of that commit
or that made up the Git repository at that point of time
into our project.
And the other commits and all the changes that were made
as part of these commits are still there,
they're just not visible at the moment.
Now, to see this in action, we need a second commit.
And therefore to make sure that we do have a second commit,
I will add another element or some extra code
to this index html file.
I'll add such a P element, such a paragraph element,
as it's called.
And there I'll say learn more about Git on,
and then I add an anchor tag element which creates a link
the official website, that's what I say
between these link tags, these A tags here.
And then here I simply point at this URL here.
And find this version of this HTML file attached
to this lecture so that you can follow along with ease.
So now I made this change and I saved this file.
And in Visual Studio Code, you see that the name
now turned yellow or orange or golden.
And you also see that there is an M
next to that file name here.
This simply means that this file was modified now.
So that we don't have the same state as before
in the last commit, but that we changed something in a file.
Now, if we want to create a snapshot that includes
that change, we must create a new commit.
And therefore that's what I'll do.
Now, to create that new commit in my terminal here,
I will again run Git add index html
because that is the file that should be included
in the next commit.
And I know that we included it in the previous commit
but the file was in a different state in that commit,
the content of the file was different
and therefore now I'm adding this updated file.
And that's important.
You add the same file multiple times whenever you change
a file and you wanna include the changes in that file
in a commit, you have to add the file.
That's why I add index html again.
Now this file modification is staged.
So if you run Git status, we can see that this modification
is to be committed in the next commit.
This change that this file was modified is to be committed.
And therefore now we can again run Git commit
and add a little message where we could say,
add a link to Git docs or anything like that.
If I now hit Enter, this commit is created.
And now when you run Git log again,
you see that we have two commits here,
which makes sense hopefully.
You'll see that the head pointer points at the latest commit
because that's something Git does automatically.
Whenever you create a new commit, this head pointer
points at that commit automatically.
But now let's say we wanna take a look at this old version
of the code to see what was changed
or to see that original state.
To do that, we have to grab the ID of that commit
we wanna go to, so of that initial commit here.
And then we can run, Git checkout
and add that ID thereafter.
And if we hit Enter, you will see that up here
the code changes.
The paragraph that includes the link is gone
because I'm now looking at this old version
of my project of that code again.
Now, as mentioned before on the slide,
the other code, the more recent code isn't lost,
it's still stored by Git.
It's just currently not loaded into this project.
So that's how we can move to this old version.
If you run Git log again, we see only one commit,
the initial commit because Git log by default
always locks all commits that are older
than the commit we currently checked out.
You see that the head pointer now points at that commit
but you see that this main part from before is gone.
The reason for that is that this is now basically detached.
Git has this branches feature,
which will explore a little bit later,
and our commits belong to different branches.
If we then check out a commit, this commit is basically
loaded outside of a branch which is why the branch name,
which is main in my case here,
is not displayed here anymore.
If I wanna get back to my brach that includes
all the commits, including the commit
which I'm now not seeing anymore here,
I can simply type Git checkout main.
So the name of that branch
which I know includes all those commits.
if I do that, you see the paragraph with the link is back.
And with Git log, we see all commits again
and we see that now the head pointer
points at that latest commit in that main branch again.
So that's how we can move around with Git checkout.
And as you can see, this is all just temporary.
We don't delete anything if we check out an older commit,
we just load it temporarily and we can always go back
to the full history, to the full branch
which includes all these commits that belong to it
by checking out that branch again.